What Happens When You Type “google.com” in Your Browser and Press Enter
All publicly accessed websites have a URL (Uniform Resource Locator) or a globally unique identifier/address (e.g. a domain name — google.com). Contents of a website can be viewed through a browser and new contents can also be added. With the use of a DNS server (Domain Name Server), URLs are translated to the IP addresses connected to web servers servicing websites or applications. These IP addresses are what is used to locate web servers, application servers and resources on the internet. DNS have a record of all allocated IP addresses by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).

Whenever a URL (google.com) is typed in on a browser and the “ENTER” button is clicked, the local device first searches its local DNS cache for the IP address of the URL. If a local device has never viewed a website, the local device will have no DNS record in its cache and so, it sends out a DNS query following an hierarchy search order until it finds the record. Once if is found, it uses the detail (i.e. IP address) from the DNS record to connect to the website, request a HTTP(S) Pull from the web/application server, display the data/information on the requesting tab of the browser and save the DNS record in its locally stored DNS cache. All this process takes a few seconds depending on the internet speed.

Technical terms in web browsing:

What is TCP/IP?

TCP/IP stands for Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol.

TCP/IP is a set of standardised rules of communication protocols used to connect network devices on the internet (or a private network) and also allows computers to communicate on a computer.

What is a Firewall?

A firewall is a set of rules applied on a network (i.e. network devices) used to prevent unauthorised access (and threats) to a network and restricts outgoing traffic on the internet.

What is HTTPS/SSL?

HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) is an application protocol that allows users to communicate data on the World Wide Web.

SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) is an encryption layer for communication.

TLS (Transport Layer Security) is an encryption layer for communication.

HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure) is the combination of HTTP and SSL/TLS and encrypts communication between a web server and a local device’s web browser.

What is DNS?

DNS (Domain Name Server) is a server used for keeping records of domain names’ IP addresses.

What is a Load Balancer?

A load balancer is a device used to balance traffic to/from a network. It handles network surge of traffic at peak time.

What is a database?

A database is an organised collection of structured information electronically stored.
